h1. to_lang

*to_lang* is a Ruby library that adds language translation methods to strings, backed by the Google Translate API.

h2. Installation

Simply run @gem install to_lang@.

h2. Usage

To use *to_lang*, require the library, then call @ToLang.start@ with your Google Translate API key. At this point you will have access to all the new translation methods, which take the form @to_language@, where "language" is the language you wish to translate to.

Google Translate attempts to detect the source language, but you can specify it explicitly by calling methods in the form @to_target_language_from_source_language@, where "target language" is the language you are translating to and "source_language" is the language you are starting with. An inverted form with equivalent functionality, @from_source_language_to_target_language@ is also available. These methods are generated dynamically and will not appear in a call to @String.new.methods@ until they have been called once. Strings will, however, @respond_to?@ these methods prior to their dynamic definition.

The dynamic methods are simply syntactic sugar for @String#translate@, which you can use directly as well.

h2. Examples

Load and initialize *to_lang*:

<pre><code>require 'to_lang'
ToLang.start('YOUR_GOOGLE_TRANSLATE_API_KEY')
</code></pre>

Translate some text to Spanish:

<pre><code>"Very cool gem!".to_spanish
=> "Muy fresco joya!"
</code></pre>

A case where the source language is ambiguous:

<pre><code>"a pie".to_spanish
=> "a pie"
"a pie".to_spanish_from_english
=> "un pastel"
</code></pre>

Or equivalently:

<pre><code>"a pie".from_english_to_spanish
=> "un pastel"
</code></pre>

Using @String#translate@ directly:

<pre><code>"hello world".translate('es')
=> "hola mundo"
"a pie".translate('es', :from => 'en')
=> "un pastel"
</code></pre>

h2. Debugging

@String#translate@ also has the advantage of allowing you to get debug output for a translation. @String#translate@ accepts a @:debug@ option with three possible values: @:request@, @:response@, and @:all@. @:request@ will cause the method to return the generated URL for the Google Translate API call. @:response@ will cause the method to return the full response from the API call as a hash. @:all@ will cause the method to return a hash which contains both the generated request URL and the full response.

<pre><code>"hello world".translate('es', :debug => :response)
=> https://www.googleapis.com/language/translate/v2?key=my_key&q=hello+world&target=es
</code></pre>

<pre><code>"hello world".translate('es', :debug => :response)
=> {"data"=>{"translations"=>[{"translatedText"=>"hola mundo"}]}}
</code></pre>

<pre><code>"hello world".translate('es', :debug => :all)
=> {:request=>"https://www.googleapis.com/language/translate/v2?key=my_key&q=hello+world&target=es",
   :response=>{"data"=>{"translations"=>[{"translatedText"=>"hola mundo"}]}}}
</code></pre>

h2. Supported Languages

*to_lang* adds the following methods to strings. Each of these methods can be called with an explicit source language by appending @_from_source_language@ or prepending @from_source_language_@ to the method name.

* to_afrikaans
* to_albanian
* to_arabic
* to_belarusian
* to_bulgarian
* to_catalan
* to_simplified_chinese
* to_traditional_chinese
* to_croatian
* to_czech
* to_danish
* to_dutch
* to_english
* to_estonian
* to_filipino
* to_finnish
* to_french
* to_galician
* to_german
* to_greek
* to_haitian_creole
* to_hebrew
* to_hindi
* to_hungarian
* to_icelandic
* to_indonesian
* to_irish
* to_italian
* to_japanese
* to_latvian
* to_lithuanian
* to_macedonian
* to_malay
* to_maltese
* to_norwegian
* to_persian
* to_polish
* to_portuguese
* to_romanian
* to_russian
* to_serbian
* to_slovak
* to_slovenian
* to_spanish
* to_swahili
* to_swedish
* to_thai
* to_turkish
* to_ukrainian
* to_vietnamese
* to_welsh
* to_yiddish

h2. Documentation

API documentation can be found at "rubydoc.info":http://rubydoc.info/github/jimmycuadra/to_lang/master/frames.

h2. Roadmap

* Investigate Unicode support for Ruby 1.8. *to_lang* has only been tested with 1.9.

h2. Feedback and Contributions

Feedback is greatly appreciated. If you have any problems with *to_lang*, please open a new issue. Make sure you are using the latest version of the gem, or HEAD if you've cloned the Git repository directly. Please include debugging output from using @String#translate@'s @:debug@ option, if relevant to your issue. If you'd like to fix bugs, add features, or improve the library in general, feel free to fork the project and send me a pull request with your changes.
